okay well sorry i'm just
turning the camera on the other way
i'm actually uh
in a town in armenia
a place where uh
just about a year ago
not far from here in arts off a kind of
an autonomous
armenian community in the late soviet
period basically wanted to secede from
the azeri ssr
uh and uh they didn't recognize that
kind of plebiscites and
self-determination and a war ensued
uh in the in the early 90s
during the dissolution of the soviet
union and uh yeah thinking about the
ghosts of communism and
connecting it to somehow this struggle
of
communities to sort of determine their
own fate and it's interesting to think
about chiapas
in the early 90s 94 and thinking about
this struggle that happened within the
soviet union
and the difficulty in a way to find
a
language within a left
especially in the context of a
dissolving kind of union let's say of
around communism
and
this last fall then there was an
invasion as their azerbaijan went to
inside this space and
there's a lot
of
dead young people actually you know if
you see it on that building there's
actually an image of a i didn't plan
this but uh one of the young people from
this town that that was killed
about 4 000
people have died from that invasion i
mean
and uh that would be like comparable to
maybe like 400 000
americans
uh in the context of population uh but
instead of
you know
the 44 days you know it took the us i
don't know 2 000 soldiers of over 20
years and we we see how you know the us
commemorates that death but
i think david
for me i
is
is a comrade that tried to kind of uh
think
that
impossible
kind of space
of of thinking the sort of reconciling
leftist history
with all the kind of uh limits and blind
spots and
and uh
basically the reinvention of the
different politics maybe a sense
[Music]
that's a very precious kind of uh loss i
feel
um you know the one year passing is a
very
um
difficult thing in the armenian context
that it's highly commemorated so this
this month is going to be heavy with a
lot of uh commemorations
marking one year um of a lot of young
people who died especially from this
region that we're in
but i i
you know i i was thinking today how to
kind of reconcile this kind of uh the
lives of people who get lost who have no
recognition and then friends like david
who everybody remembers
and uh
it's a difficult thing you know so but
i i wanted to just say
david seemed for it what everyone has
also said
was this person who
despite his exceptionality he was also
an everyman you know
and uh that that special quality to be
uh
yeah just just involved in everything in
the details of thinking and being with
others
and fully
video cameras
it makes sense to have someone talking
at the same time right now
i didn't prepare anything like that to
speak i just wanted to be present to
where i would be today and that's where
i am and
i wish david was still with us
but i think if there's something that we
can kind of keep
alive
is this kind of search
that really confronts even the dead ends
of of
whatever has been a left
and still claims
some some affinity to that struggle
towards a different way of life and a
different conception of living together
so
we miss you david but you're here with
us actually so that's